The Zep Re Academy Parametric Insurance Webinar – 05/06/2024


 Samuel Macharia
Business Development Officer, ACRE Africa
        Agriculture Insurance Underwriter
          BSC, Agriculture
Contact: smacharia@acreafrica.com


1. Discuss the state of agriculture insurance globally 
and in Africa
2. Discuss the insurability of agriculture risks
3. Describe the various risk classifications of 
agriculture insurance
4. Apply the risk classifications of agriculture 
insurance in product designDay 1 Training 
Objectives

Global Agric. Insurance premiums


Africa Agriculture GWP

NB:Distribution by product globally 
Source: World Bank
oCrop insurance is the most developed line accounting for about 90% of the written premium worldwide.
oMPCI dominant in the USA and Canada, Named peril dominant in Europe.

NB:Gap in smallholder insurance coverage across regions, 2018


NB:Why is agriculture a special line of business?
Successful insurance companies consistently strive for profitable growth, differentiation, and a unique, 
sustainable market position. Companies struggle for an edge in service or time-to-market. 
The nature of the insurance market makes those goals challenging to meet. Below are reasons why 
agriculture 
1.Difficulties in achieving adequate diversification- crops are planted in regions that suffer the same 
adverse events
2.Asymmetries of information at underwriting- unable to differentiate high and low risk producers. If 
premiums are set on averages, might attract high risk producers.
3.Geographical dispersion of production making operation and admin costs high
4.Complexity of biological processes of agricultural production which requires skilled and expert. Cause 
and effect not readily observable. 
5.The distribution network is widespread and products are not standard 

Agribusiness value chain and risks


Important financial implications
oThe low level of agricultural risk may increase premium rates to unaffordable levels for farmers resulting 
in risk selection problems
oHigh loss variance and propensity to catastrophic loss for some perils make premium rates worse
oPremium rates have an important inverse effect on farmer participation 
oLoss volatility increases the insurer’s dependence on reinsurance.  Cooperation with government can 
help. Example Mongolia set up a risk pooling arrangement for livestock insurance
oIncreased management expenses, increase rates, which decrease sales, which increase adverse 
selection, which increase loss ratios.

Insurability of agriculture risk 
Before an insurer decides to devote capital to agriculture risk, consider the following:
1.Premium charges must be economically feasible for all parties
2.Large number of homogenous subjects exposed to the same risk- assuming individual loss events are 
independent
3.Probability of the occurrence of insured peril must be calculable
4.Loss should not be catastrophic
5.Loss must be sufficiently large, determinable and measurable- the loss to be insured should be important 
enough to warrant an insurance contract
6.Loss must be accidental and unintentional
Challenges:
1.Because of cyclical nature of farming business, cashflows affect premium collection
2.At the set premium, will sufficient economies of scale be achieved to pay claims, increase reserves, pay 
brokers as well as cater for fixed admin costs?
3.Possible to incur substantial losses even with loss ration below 100%
4.If loss events are not independent- reduce risk retention and possible reduce business to minimize 
catastrophic risk to portfolio.
5.For catastrophic events- Physical risk reduction, loss minimization and government catastrophe fund or 
catastrophe insurance pool

NB:AGRICULTURE INSURANCE  PRODUCTS
AGRICULTURE INSURANCE
CROP  INSURANCE LIVESTOCK INSURANCE
Index Based 
Crop Insurance 
e.g., Weather 
Index Insurance,
Area Yield Index
Insurance Multi-Peril Crop 
InsuranceIndex based Livestock 
insurance Livestock Mortality 
cover  Hybrid Crop 
Insurance
(Combination of 
Index and MPC I)
Cattle, Camels, Horses, 
Goats, Sheep, Poultry, 
Aquaculture, Pigs, Bees.Cattle/Camel/Sheep/ 
Goats

NB:Risk Mitigation : Agriculture 
is susceptible to various 
risks like weather events, 
pests, and market 
fluctuations. Insurance 
provides a safety net against
these uncertainties .Income Stabilization : Insurance
payouts compensate for crop 
losses, stabilizing farmers' 
income and preventing 
financial crises during difficult 
seasons.
Food Security : By safeguarding 
farmers' livelihoods, agriculture
insurance contributes to overall
food security by ensuring a 
stable supply of crops.Climate Resilience : In the face 
of climate change, insurance 
encourages adoption of climate
-resilient practices, promoting 
long-term sustainability.Importance of Agricultural Insurance

NB:Importance of Agricultural Insurance cont.….
Economic Growth : A robust 
agriculture sector drives 
economic growth by boosting 
production, income 
generation, and employment 
opportunities.Disaster Recovery : In the 
aftermath of disasters, 
insurance aids in the recovery 
process, helping communities 
rebuild faster and more 
effectively.
Inclusive Development : 
Agriculture insurance extends 
financial protection to 
smallholder farmers, fostering 
inclusivity and reducing 
inequality in rural areas.Debt Management : Insurance
assists farmers in repaying 
loans even in case of crop 
failures, reducing the burden 
of debt and financial strain.

An agriculture insurance risk is any unforeseen event that affects 
the production of crops and livestock.What is an Agriculture Insurance Risk

NB:•Examples of Risks
Examples of risks
•Production risk – They are natural disasters that occur at farm level.  They
range from climatic risks to pests and diseases, theft etc.
•Moral Hazards – They are the risks that are associated with the money 
management in the farm, bad financial decisions can be detrimental to 
the success of a cropping season.  
•Institutional politics risks: - Risks emanating from government directives.
•Human or Personnel risk: - These are risks associated with staff health 
and personal relationships.
•Market risks and price volatility:  - These are risks associated with 
changes in global prices and market forces.Examples of Agricultural 
Insurance risks
•Production risks: - include weather 
related risks, pests and diseases, 
theft etc.
•Farm to market risks: - Risks 
occurring during transportation
•Price volatility 

Data is a critical component for agriculture insurance placement.
The data should be
 1. Timely
 2. Accurate
 3. Relevant
 4. Auditable
 5. ReliableData and Insurance

Yield data – they are more relatable to farmers, give a more 
comprehensive coverage but very expensive to collect
2. Weather data or remote sensing data – they offer low cost 
solutions that have a limited coverage.Types of data sets for Agriculture insurance

Farm management
Diversification
Loss mitigation
Prevention
InsuranceUnderwriting Principles and considerations

NB:Relevance  of different  categories  of crop-insurance
PRODUCT  TYPE WHEN  IS IT POTENTIALLY  FEASIBLE? WHEN  IS IT NOT  RECOMMENDED?
1. Weather Index  
insurance for 
Cropsa.Rainfall/weather  dependent  farming;
b.Small-scale  farming;
c.Good  accuracy  of underlying  weather dataa.Heavily  irrigated  farming  (WII less relevant);
b.Accuracy  of weather  data is not proven;
c.Expectation  of indemnity  loss assessment
2.Area Yield Index
Insurance for 
Crops;a.Adequate historical  granular  yield data;
b.Yield  data is representative of farmers’  yield;
c.Yield  data is available  speedily  for claimsa.Inadequate historical  yield data available;
b.Yield  data cannot  be collected;
c.Poor correlation  between  yield index  and
farmers’  losses
d.Concentration  risk due to low granularity
3. Indemnity 
Insurance  for 
Cropsa.Good quality  historical  yield and loss data  is  
available;
b.Loss  adjustors  or claims management is  
viable;
c.Cost of claims assessment can be absorbed 
into  premium  rates;
d.Underwriting  is possible  e.g. of emergence  of 
seedling, farming  practices.a.Typically  for smallholder  farmers- very 
difficult  to apply  without  presence  of good  
claims  management;
b.If historical  yield/loss  data is not available.
c.If farming  practices  cannot  be monitored  
reliably.

NB:1.Discuss the state of agriculture insurance globally and in Africa
2.Discuss the insurability of agriculture risks
3.Describe the various risk classifications of agriculture 
insurance
4.Apply the risk classifications of agriculture insurance in 
product design•Day 1 Recap

NB:1. What percentage of gross written premiums does Africa contribute globally
         A. 1%
          B. 10%
         C. 2%
         D. 5%
2. Which of the following is not an example of an agricultural insurable risk
         A. Production Risks
         B. Moral Hazards
         C. Reputation risk
         D.  Price Volatility•Day 1 Quiz

NB:3. Which of the following statement is true
  1. A large proportion of small holder farmers are not insured
  2. it is not necessary for insurance companies to insure small holder farmers
  3. Small holder farmers are cheap to insure 
  4. We do not have small holder farmers outside Africa
4. Which of the following is not a principle to consider for agricultural insurance underwriting
 A.     Risk mitigation
B. Diversification
C. Farm management
D. Loss Availability
  •Quiz

NB:5. Which of the following statement is true
A. A weather index insurance is appropriate for a non irrigated field
B. An indemnity product is ideal for small holder farmers
C. An Area yield index is applicable if farmers have adequate granular yield
D. Yield is not important in an indemnity product design. •QUIZ

Q & A SESSION

