Agriculture Parametric 
Insurance Webinar
Providing innovative insurance solutions to farmers across 
Africa
BY: Kaingu Kambi
Email: kkambi@acreafrica.com
Mobile: +254799748683

NB:a)Explain the fundamental concept of parametric insurance and how it differs 
from traditional indemnity insurance
b)Discuss the basic principles underlying parametric insurance, including 
triggers, parameters, and payout structures.
c)Identify different types of parametric insurance products available in the 
market.•Day 2 Training Objectives

Products
There are three categories of crop insurance products
Indemnity Products 
..involve an estimation of 
the farm yield at harvest 
based or a physical 
assessment of the loss – 
either through an 
assessment report or crop
cut.Index Insurance ..
uses remote data to 
provide a parametric 
insurance cover. A trigger
(or triggers) based on the
index will result in 
payment to the farmer.Hybrid Products ..
provide a blend of an 
index as well as crop cuts
to calculate a yield 
element to the cover as 
well. 
1 2 3


TYPES OF AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE
1.Crop Insurance
2.Livestock Insurance


WHAT IS AN INDEX?
Index:- A statistical/mathematical formula that measures deviations from the 
normal level of a parameter. It is an indicator.
Example: 
  Quadratic function/Model
Model/Mathematical/index
•a, b, c
• If these are replaced with  
 Rainfall/precipitation
 Temperature
 Soil Moisture
Then f(x) can be viewed as a 
climate model
to date
Parameters
• Climate model
• Agronomic model
• Statistical model
Example: f(x)=ax2+bx+c.



PARAMETRIC INSURANCE CORE ELEMENTS
Trigger event - Index/measurement at which the contract starts to pay out.
Limit/Exit  - Index/measurement at which maximum payment is made
Pay-out mechanism/ Tick - Defines what happens in the case of an event meeting or 
exceeding the defined threshold, i.e., they determine how much money is paid out to the 
insured
Deductible —An insurance policy feature which acts as a loss limit; the insurer generally 
pays all losses beyond the deductible.

……THE TYPE OF PARAMETRIC INSURANCE PRODUCT IS DETERMINED BY ITS 
TRIGGER EVENT
8
Precipitation based- WII/Soil Moisture
Trigger event: 
                      Deficit in precipitation
    Excess precipitation
Area Yield Index- AYII
•Trigger event: 
Shortfall in yield from pre-agreed LTA
             Yield estimation uses crop cut exercises (CCE)
Index Based Livestock Insurance-IBLI
•Trigger event:
 Vegetation failure occasioned by drought estimated via NDVI data 

WEATHER DATA SOURCES
We have two sources of weather 
data:
I.Satellite
II.Automatic Weather station
Parameters measured include
a.Rainfall
b.Temperature
c.Relative Humidity
d.Solar Radiation
e.Leaf Greenness

•One of the key requirements in setting up any crop index model is checking for availability of agricultural data 
and information . 
•Some of the key agricultural information to be considered include;
Cropping patterns for different crop varieties 
Assessments of cropping regions/ locations
Soil types 
Any available loss data and causes of loss
Information on mechanization/ farmer practices
•An effective weather index would be one that reflects losses when losses are experienced on ground and 
eliminates basis risks.CROP INDEX SETTING UP - PARAMETRIC DEFINITIONS
Parameter Options available
Start of cover Static/ dynamic
Period of cover Entire crop cycle/ Individual crop phases
Payout structure Cumulative/ Incremental
Trigger type Cumulative/ average/ maximum/ minimum


INDEX BASED CROP INSURANCE TYPES
 
C
c. Area Yield Index Insurance
Compensates farmers from 
yield shortfall in a given Unit 
Area of Insurance 
(Geographical Area)
a. Rainfall based-index Insurance
pays out based on measured 
rainfall levels, serving as a proxy 
for agricultural losses incurred due 
to insufficient or excess rainfall.
b. Soil Moisture based-index 
Insurance   compensates farmers 
based on the measured soil 
moisture levels, offering protection 
against losses incurred due to 
inadequate or excess soil moisture


•Weather based-index insurance 
Dynamic Cover 
Start (when 
sufficient rainfall 
recorded during 
planting window)Germination (Day 1 
– 21) 
Max Loss Payable = 
20%Vegetative (Day 
21 – 50)
Max Loss Payable 
= 30%Flowering (Day 45 – 
85)
Max Loss Payable = 
35%Ripening/Dry Down (Day 80 – 135)
Max Loss Payable = 15%
RISKS COVEREDDrought
Effect:  Replanting, Stunted growth, Poor grain filling and 
Crop deathExcess Rainfall
Effect: Rotting/sprouting of seedOverall 
Coverage = 
Sum of all 
losses, max. 
100%The model combines weather data, the agronomic model(based on the FAOs crop 
water requirements) and a statistical model. 
Weather Data +               Agronomic Model


Soil Moisture Index 
Insurance


Soil Moisture in 
the root zone 
layer
Root zone 
layer
0-5 cmWhat is soil moisture
•Soil moisture is the water present in the unsaturated zone 
between soil surface and groundwater level 
Online sources. ACRE does not own the copywrite to the images.
Wilting 
resulting from 
deficit Soil 
Moisture in the 
root zone layer
Affects: growing cycle
Excess soil 
Moisture in the 
root zone layer
Affects: growing cycle
Excess soil 
Moisture prior to 
harvestExcess soil 
Moisture prior to 
harvest

GerminationExposure to variability in soil moisture over 
growing seasonWhat is Soil Moisture index insurance?
Measurable weather condition that is closely related to agricultural production losses e.g. 
rainfall, soil moisture level , yields, or vegetation levels measured by satellites
Excess
> 25%
Deficit
<15%
Excess 
Moisture
(payout)
Normal 
Moisture No 
(Payout)
Dry spell 
(payout)
Agriculture Index
Metrics/requirementsResult at the end of the 
season(Inference)
Maize Crop
     Stages
•Drought
•Deficit soil
Moisture•Drought
•Deficit soil
Moisture•Drought
•Deficit soil
Moisture•Excess 
Moisture
 If the Index fails to attain or exceeds a set 
threshold-Payout is realized
Vegetation Flowering Preharvest 
dry down

 Soil moisture is a good proxy for yield
 Soil moisture is a good indicator for drought
 Soil moisture is mainly influenced by both 
precipitation and evaporation
Soil moisture: Good proxy to assess if plant can 
reach its full potential → early detection of bad 
conditions
> 20 years of high resolution, near real time SM 
data for Index development.
Reliable data with passive microwave capable of 
penetrating cloud cover  and thus a reliable Soil 
Moisture-based drought index Insurance•Soil moisture as a good prosy for index developmentWhy Soil Moisture Index

•Weather Index Insurance underwriting 
considerations
Fundamental 
considerations 
include; 
Type of crop and 
variety Farm location Planting dates Long-term 
average yield per
acre Scale of 
production (small
scale, medium or
large scale)Historical loss 
experience
Underwriting 
requisite details
Farm location Planting datesNumber of 
acres Sum Insured 
(Cost of 
production or 
output value)Crop to be 
insuredCrop variety




INDEX DEVELOPMENT 
We have 3 types of index models namely;
1.Simple model
    2.Moderate model
   3.Complex model


•This is a model that looks at the total amount of rainfall received 
over an entire season/ phase
•Pros: Easy to build and communicate 
•Cons: Ignores distribution of the rainfall SIMPLE INDEX MODEL
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 1,200 
 1,000 
 800 
 600 
 400 
 200 
 -   
Total Average 15% below 15% aboveTotal Rainfall Received Over The Season

•This a model that looks at not only the total amount of rainfall but also distribution
•It achieves this by:
Breaking the cover into phases
Defining a rainy day. e.g. a day that receives 3mm or more of rainfall
•Pros: Captures distribution of rainfall fairly accurately
•Cons: A bit challenging to model and communicateMODERATE MODEL
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 1,200 
 1,000 
 800 
 600 
 400 
 200 
 -   
Phase III Phase II Phase IModerate Per Phase 

•This a model that looks at not only the total amount of rainfall but also distribution 
at a more granular level. 
•It achieves this by improving on the moderate model by:
Breaking the phases into block of days e.g.. 7 days, 10 days
Consecutive day counts to check for dry spellsCOMPLEX INDEX MODEL
Date 01-Oct 02-Oct 03-Oct 04-Oct 05-Oct 06-Oct 07-Oct 08-Oct 09-Oct 10-Oct 11-Oct 12-OctSum of 
rainfallTrigger Loss
Rainfall Amount(mm) 3 4 2 10 15 1 4 6 3 2 1 4 55 40 Enough Rain
Block 1             39 40 Payout
Block 2             42 40 Enough Rain
Block 3             41 40 Enough Rain
Block 4             41 40 Enough Rain
Block 5             32 40 Payout
Block 6             21 40 Payout
Total               #=3/6

NB:C.Area Yield Index Insurance
Features:
This product mainly targets mainly cereal farmers in selected geographical units known as 
Unit Areas of Insurance, against loss of yield in the selected unit as a result of (but not 
limited to):
oadverse climatic conditions
odestruction by animals and pests,
oplagues
odiseases
oany other perils which may influence the yield quantity of the Insured Crops in a 
given region
Note: Yield estimation through crop cuts has to be done at the end of season in predefined 
UAIs to determine payable losses.

NB:•Unit Area of Insurance (UAI)
oTo determine the level of coverage for each farmer in a region, different Unit Areas of 
Insurance have to be selected. 
oA Unit Area of Insurance refers to a specific portion of territory within your 
administrative boundary for which Expected Yields, and Production Shortfalls are 
determined, and in which equal/similar geographical and climatic conditions apply to 
all producers of the insured crop. 
oEach farm is insured based on the conditions and harvest history of the Unit Area of 
Insurance where the farm falls.
oThe farmer insures the value of the expected harvest based on the long-term 
average yield in his Unit Area of Insurance.
oThe Long Term Average Yield is the average of the historical yields in the farmer’s 
Unit as determined and recorded by the authorized government authority.Basis of cover

NB:•Sample UAI mapping 


NB:•Basis of compensation
020040060080010001200140016001800
Crop season with no payout Crop season with payoutYield (kg per hectare)Reference average yield
Coverage levelat80% of average yield
Yieldshortfall
to be compensated
by insurance payout
AYII payouts are determined with respect to the “Coverage yield Level”, i.e. A % of the 
reference average yield in the area 

Picture Based Insurance and Advisory
New product that uses farmers smartphone 
photos, satellite imagery, weather station data, 
agronomic records and online data archives to 
provide a robust insurance and advisory 
product
The project is a partnership between ACRE 
Africa, KALRO, IFPRI and Wageningen 
University
Key data science aspects of AI, ML and DL are 
put in practice in this project
Target Number of Farmers 45,000. Baseline 
and endline study to be conducted on 6000 
farmers

NB:•Index Based Livestock Insurance


NB:•What does the index measure?
•Healthy growing plants are green and lush.
They reflect light differently to bare soil or 
plants that are dying which is why they 
appear green to our eyes.
•By accurately measuring the level of 
greenness  of any location, we can get an 
idea of how healthy the forage is in that 
location. 
•NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation 
Index) is a remote sensing method that 
uses the reflectance of light in the visible 
and near-infrared (NIR) wavelengths to 
determine the amount and health of 
vegetation in an area


NB:•What is the index?
•The level of the greenness of each 
area on the surface of the earth is 
measured by a satellite as it flies 
over it. 
•This reading is called the NDVI or 
Normalized Difference Vegetation 
Index
•NDVI readings for each location are 
recorded on a publicly available 
website every 10 days. 
•They are used to produce NDVI 
images like this one. 


NB:•But unpalatable species are also green!
•Large areas of rangeland may 
appear green even in a 
drought because of the 
presence of unpalatable 
species such as Prosopis .
•Comparing NDVI images of 
such areas with images taken 
in past years allows 
differences caused by forage 
plants to show up.  


NB:•LIVESTOCK TO BE INSURED HAVE TO HAVE A STANDARD 
VALUATION MODEL
What is a TLU?
•A Tropical Livestock Unit (TLU) is the 
unit by which IBLI measures livestock.
•Premiums are given in KSH per TLU. 
•Payouts are calculated based on the 
payout per TLU. 
1.4 TLU
1 TLU
0.1 TLU

NB:•Premiums
oThe premium is the amount paid annually by a pastoralist per TLU that he/she 
wishes to insure .
oDifferent IBLI Units have different premiums. 
Premiums are Annual; Payouts are Seasonal
oThe IBLI Index for the season determines whether a payout will be made and is the 
basis for calculating the percentage payout.
oThe percentage payout is a percentage of USD 140 – the cost of keeping 1 TLU 
alive during severe drought conditions over the year.
oIn the IBLI Asset Protection contract, the maximum payout in the LRLD is 58% and 
in the SRSD it is 42%. 

34Product Design
Period of cover considerations
Key consideration : Bimodal Seasonality
Coverage for wet seasons only
Annual Product
Premiums paid once for the two seasons
2 payout per year: at the end of each season
Frequency and Severity of Losses
Consideration for the cyclic nature of drought events running every 4 or 5 years. Season 2 Oct-Dec Season  1  Mar-Jun
Product design approach
Hybrid product combining deterministic and stochastic models to compute premiums.
Assumption: Leveraging a probability distribution function to model historical losses and generate random 
loss values enhances risk estimation and pricing, serves as a valuable complement to deterministic models

Parametric vs. Indemnity Insurance
Feature Parametric Insurance Indemnity Insurance
Trigger for payoutObjective measure of weather 
event (e.g., rainfall deficiency, 
excessive heat days)Crop damage and yield loss
Basis for payout amountPredefined payout based on 
severity of weather parameterDocumented loss of crops and 
income
Claims processFaster, automated based on 
weather dataSlower, requires proof of crop 
damage and yield loss
Data relianceRelies on independent weather 
data sources (e.g., satellites)Relies on farmer reports and field 
assessments
Fraud riskLower - payout based on objective 
dataPotentially higher - risk of inflated 
damage reports
Scalability Easier to administer for large areasCan be complex and time-
consuming for individual farms

NB:a)Explain the fundamental concept of parametric insurance and how it differs 
from traditional indemnity insurance
b)Discuss the basic principles underlying parametric insurance, including 
triggers, parameters, and payout structures.
c)Identify different types of parametric insurance products available in the 
market.Recap of Training 
Objectives

NB:QUIZ
1. Which of the following triggers a payout in parametric agriculture insurance?
A. Documented crop damage reports by the farmer
B. Predefined weather data exceeding a specific threshold (e.g., rainfall deficiency)
C. Market price fluctuations affecting crop value
D. Actual financial losses incurred by the farmer after a harvest
2. Compared to traditional indemnity insurance for agriculture, what does parametric 
insurance generally offer
A. Slower claims processing due to reliance on third-party data
B. More comprehensive coverage for various causes of crop loss
C. Faster payouts based on objective weather data
D. Higher premiums due to potential for inflated claims

NB:QUIZ
3. Parametric agriculture insurance is most beneficial for farmers facing risks from:
A. Theft or vandalism of farm equipment
B. Fluctuations in commodity prices
C. Specific weather events impacting crop yield (e.g., droughts, floods)
D. Accidental damage to crops during harvest
4. A farmer enrolled in parametric insurance experiences a significant drop in crop 
yield due to a pest infestation. Will they receive a payout under this policy?
A. Yes, as long as they can document the extent of the pest damage.
B. No, parametric insurance only covers losses due to weather events.
C. Maybe, depending on if the infestation was caused by an insured weather event.
D. It depends on the specific terms and conditions of their policy.

THANK YOU!
Do you have any questions?
enquiries@acreafrica.com
+254 719 249 615 
www.acreafrica.com


